Update readme (#95)
AI4S2S/s2spy: README.md

<img width="300" alt="Logo" src="./docs/assets/images/ai4s2s_logo.png">

# s2spy

[![github repo badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/github-repo-000.svg?logo=github&labelColor=gray&color=blue)](https://github.com/AI4S2S/ai4s2s)
[![github license badge](https://img.shields.io/github/license/AI4S2S/s2spy)](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy)
[![fair-software badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/fair--software.eu-%E2%97%8F%20%20%E2%97%8F%20%20%E2%97%8F%20%20%E2%97%8F%20%20%E2%97%8B-yellow)](https://fair-software.eu)
[![build](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![sonarcloud](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/actions/workflows/sonarcloud.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/actions/workflows/sonarcloud.yml)
[![workflow scc badge](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=AI4S2S_ai4s2s&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=AI4S2S_ai4s2s)

A high-level python package integrating expert knowledge and artificial intelligence to boost (sub) seasonal forecasting.

## Why s2spy?

> Producing reliable (sub) seasonal (S2S) forecasts with machine learning techniques remains a huge challenge. Currently, these data-driven S2S forecasts generally suffer from a lack of trust because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Producing reliable sub-seasonal to seasonal (S2S) forecasts with machine learning techniques remains a challenge. Currently, these data-driven S2S forecasts generally suffer from a lack of trust because of:
```

- Intransparent data processing and poorly reproducible scientific outcomes
- Technical pitfalls related to machine learning-based predictability (e.g. overfitting)
- Black-box methods without sufficient explanation

> To tackle these challenges, we build this open-source, high-level python package, `s2spy`. It provides an interface between artificial intelligence and expert knowledge, to boost predictability and physical understanding of S2S processes. By implementing optimal data-handling and parallel-computing packages, it can efficiently run across different Big Climate Data platforms. Key components will be explainable AI and causal discovery, which will support the classical scientific interplay between theory, hypothesis-generation and data-driven hypothesis-testing, enabling knowledge-mining from data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To tackle these challenges, we build `s2spy` which is an open-source, high-level python package. It provides an interface between artificial intelligence and expert knowledge, to boost predictability and physical understanding of S2S processes. By implementing optimal data-handling and parallel-computing packages, it can efficiently run across different Big Climate Data platforms. Key components will be explainable AI and causal discovery, which will support the classical scientific interplay between theory, hypothesis-generation and data-driven hypothesis-testing, enabling knowledge-mining from data.
```

> This tool will be a community effort. It can help us achieve trustworthy data-driven forecasts by providing the user with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developing this tool will be a community effort. It helps us achieve trustworthy data-driven forecasts by providing:
```

- Transparent and reproducible analyses

> - Best practices in model verification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Best practices in model verifications
```

- Understanding the sources of predictability

## Installation
[![workflow pypi badge](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/s2spy.svg?colorB=blue)](https://pypi.python.org/project/s2spy/)

> [![supported python versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/s2spy)](https://pypi.python.org/project/s2spy/)

Reviewer: the python versions here ['3.7', '3.8', '3.9'] are not the same as those used in the [build workflow ](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/blob/8c8251e20965195c8f90843292e846ac30ce5cb8/.github/workflows/build.yml#L20) i.e. ['3.8', '3.9', '3.10']

Author: Thanks for the notice. Yes, this is because in our last release the python versions are ['3.7', '3.8', '3.9'] and pypi has these versions. But now we switch to ['3.8', '3.9', '3.10']. Since we haven't made a release, on pypi it is still ['3.7', '3.8', '3.9']. The badges are loaded from pypi. This will be updated after we make a new release. But thanks for mentioning this. 👍

To install the in-development version from the GitHub repository, do:

```console
python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy.git
```

### Configure the package for development and testing

> The testing framework used here is [pytest](https://pytest.org). Before running the test, we get a local copy of the source code via the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The testing framework used here is [pytest](https://pytest.org). Before running the test, we get a local copy of the source code and install `s2spy` via the command:
```

```py

> python3 -m pip install -e .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy.git
cd s2spy
python3 -m pip install -e .
```

> python3 -m pip install .

Reviewer: To install the `main` branch, no need to clone the repo. It is possible to install it as: 
`python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy.git@main`

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! It is updated now.

```

### Configure the package for development and testing

> The testing framework used here is [pytest](https://pytest.org). Before running the test, the package need to be installed and configured via the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The testing framework used here is [pytest](https://pytest.org). Before running the test, we get a local copy of the source code via the command:

git clone https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy.git
cd s2spy

Then, the package needs to be installed:
```

Reviewer: Please add code-block syntax ` ```py ...```  `around the codes. I couldn't add them while suggesting them here.

Author: Corrected!

```py

> pip install -e .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
python3 -m pip install -e .
```

> pip install -e .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
python3 -m pip install -e .
```

> python setup.py develop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, run tests:

pytest
```

Reviewer: Please add code-block syntax ` ```py ...```  `around `pytest`. I couldn't add it here.

Reviewer: Because there is no any environment, it is better to add `python3 -m` for both `s2spy` and `pytest`. Otherwise, older versions of python will be picked by `pytest`.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! I will add these to the readme.

## Getting started
`s2spy` provides end-to-end solutions for machine learning (ML) based S2S forecasting.

![workflow](./docs/assets/images/workflow.png)

### Datetime operations & Data processing

> In a typical ML-based S2S project, the first step is always data processing.  A calendar-based datetime operation module is implemented to help the users prepare their data. For instance, if a user is looking for predictors for winter climate at seasonal timescales (~180 days), a `AdventCalendar` can be used to prepare the data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a typical ML-based S2S project, the first step is always data processing.  A calendar-based datetime module `time` is implemented for time operations. For instance, a user is looking for predictors for winter climate at seasonal timescales (~180 days). First, a `calendar` object is created using `AdventCalendar`:
```

```py
calendar = s2spy.time.AdventCalendar(anchor=(11, 30), freq='180d')
calendar = calendar.map_years(2020, 2021)

> calendar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calendar.show()
```

Reviewer: I think here `calendar.show()` should be used because the output of `calendar` is `AdventCalendar(month=11, day=30, freq=180d, n_targets=1)`

>>>    i_interval                 (target) 0                         1
>>>    anchor_year
>>>    2021         (2021-06-03, 2021-11-30]  (2020-12-05, 2021-06-03]
>>>    2020         (2020-06-03, 2020-11-30]  (2019-12-06, 2020-06-03]
```

> `s2spy` works with `xarray` data. Now, the user can load their data and easily resample their data to the desired timescales configured in the calendar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`s2spy` works with `xarray` data. Now, the user can load the data `input_data` and resample it to the desired timescales configured in the calendar:
```

Reviewer: another comment on **`s2spy` works with `xarray` data**. It works also with `pandas dataframe`, right? the `bins` output shown below are produced when the `input_data` is a dataframe.

Author: Yes, this is correct for now. But since we are implementing more features which require the support of multi-dimensional data, we plan to drop pandas for new features (e.g. dimensionality reduction) and therefore it is better to make it clear that we support xarray. Only the calendar could somehow work with pandas, but it is not recommended. To avoid confusion, I think it is better we only mention xarray.

```py

> calendar = calendar.map_to_data(input_data)

Reviewer: I suggest renaming the variable `calendar` to something else here e.g. `mapped_calendar`.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. But I think we just want to overwrite the old calendar with the mapped one and ask user to stick to it (Peter's idea). So in the tutorial notebook we also put it this way. I prefer to leave it like this. But thanks for your advice. I do see a point there 😉 .

> bins = s2spy.time.resample(calendar, input_data)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bins = s2spy.time.resample(calendar, input_data)
bins
```

>>>       anchor_year  i_interval                  interval  mean_data  target
>>>     0        2020           0  (2020-06-03, 2020-11-30]      275.5    True
>>>     1        2020           1  (2019-12-06, 2020-06-03]       95.5   False
>>>     2        2021           0  (2021-06-03, 2021-11-30]      640.5    True
>>>     3        2021           1  (2020-12-05, 2021-06-03]      460.5   False
```

> Depending on their tasks, the user can choose their desired calendar from a collection of different types of calendars, to process their data (e.g. `MonthlyCalendar` and `WeeklyCalendar`).

Reviewer: Please add a link to API reference for `MonthlyCalendar` and `WeeklyCalendar` above.

> Depending on their tasks, the user can choose their desired calendar from a collection of different types of calendars, to process their data (e.g. `MonthlyCalendar` and `WeeklyCalendar`).

Author: Nice suggestion! The links are added now.

### Cross-validation

> Using `s2spy`, users can easily perform cross-validation by calling a splitter and generating train/test splits with the resampled data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `s2spy`, we can generate train/test splits and perform cross-validation. To do that, a splitter is called from `sklearn.model_selection` e.g. `ShuffleSplit` and used to split the resampled data:
```

```py

> bins = s2spy.time.resample(calendar, input_data)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

from sklearn.model_selection import ShuffleSplit
splitter = ShuffleSplit(n_splits=3)
s2spy.traintest.split_groups(splitter, bins)
```

> All splitter classes from `scikit-learn` are supported, a list is available [here](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html#splitter-classes).

Reviewer: perhaps, we can add a sentence saying that users should follow scikit-learn documentation on how to use a different splitter class.

Author: Good advice! I add it to the readme.

### Dimensionality reduction

> In `s2spy`, users can perform dimensionality reduction on their data. For instance, to perform the Response Guided Dimensionality Reduction (RGDR), the user only needs to configure the RGDR operator and fit it to a precursor field. Then, this cluster can be used to transform the data into the reduced clusters:

Reviewer: can we add a reference for RGDR?

> In `s2spy`, users can perform dimensionality reduction on their data. For instance, to perform the Response Guided Dimensionality Reduction (RGDR), the user only needs to configure the RGDR operator and fit it to a precursor field. Then, this cluster can be used to transform the data into the reduced clusters:

Author: Yes, just asked Sem for one:

"Vijverberg, S. & Coumou, D. The role of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation and ocean-atmosphere interactions in driving US temperature predictability. npj Clim. Atmos. Sci. 5, 18 (2022)".

> In `s2spy`, users can perform dimensionality reduction on their data. For instance, to perform the Response Guided Dimensionality Reduction (RGDR), the user only needs to configure the RGDR operator and fit it to a precursor field. Then, this cluster can be used to transform the data into the reduced clusters:

Author: I will add a link https://www.nature.com/articles/s41612-022-00237-7.

```py
rgdr = RGDR(eps_km=600, alpha=0.05, min_area_km2=3000**2)

> rgdr.fit(precursor_field, target_timeseries)

Reviewer: We need to know `precursor_field` and `target_timeseries`. I suggest replacing this code block with a link to the notebook tutorial_RGDR.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I agree that this small piece of code is not reproducible due to `precursor_field` and `target_timeseries`. Here I want to show the minimum example of performing dimensionality reduction using our package. I prefer to keep the code and add a link to the notebook with a note "for the complete example, check [this notebook](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/blob/main/notebooks/tutorial_RGDR.ipynb)", since the notebook itself is a bit too heavy as a first bite for the user.

clustered_data = rgdr.transform(precursor_field)
_ = rgdr.plot_clusters(precursor_field, target_timeseries, lag=1)
```
![workflow](./docs/assets/images/rgdr_clusters.png)

Currently, `s2spy` supports [dimensionality reduction approaches](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html#module-sklearn.cluster) from `scikit-learn`. We are actively working on it to support more approaches in the future.

### Train a model
More information will follow soon.

> ### eXplanable AI (XAI) analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### eXplainable AI (XAI) analysis
```

More information will follow soon.

## Tutorials

> `s2spy` supports operations that are common in a machine learning pipeline of sub-seasonal to seasonal forecasting research. Tutorials covering supported methods and functionalities are listed in [notebooks](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/tree/main/notebooks).

Reviewer: can we add that users need to install `jupyter lab`?

Author: Thanks for reminding. It is added now.

> `s2spy` supports operations that are common in a machine learning pipeline of sub-seasonal to seasonal forecasting research. Tutorials covering supported methods and functionalities are listed in [notebooks](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/tree/main/notebooks).
> 
> More details about each method can be found in this [API reference documentation](https://ai4s2s.readthedocs.io/en/latest/autoapi/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`s2spy` supports operations that are common in a machine learning pipeline of sub-seasonal to seasonal forecasting research. Tutorials covering supported methods and functionalities are listed in [notebooks](https://github.com/AI4S2S/s2spy/tree/main/notebooks). More details about each method can be found in this [API reference documentation](https://ai4s2s.readthedocs.io/en/latest/autoapi/index.html).
```

## Documentation
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/ai4s2s/badge/?version=latest)](https://ai4s2s.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

> For detailed information on using `s2spy` package, please visit the [documentation page](https://ai4s2s.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) hosted at Readthedocs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For detailed information on using `s2spy` package, visit the [documentation page](https://ai4s2s.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) hosted at Readthedocs.
```
